Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Tristan Rogers. He is
a philosopher, author, and teacher. He teaches logic and
Latin at Dunham Day Classical Academy in San Francisco.
And today we're going to talk about his book,
Conservatism, Past and Present, A Philosophical Introduction. There it
is.
Great.
So, Doctor Rogers, welcome to the show. It's a
huge pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much for having me.
So let me ask you, what motivated you to
write a book on conservatism?
Um, YEAH, thanks. So the, the book really developed
out of, um, research I was doing in philosophy,
um, on kind of the intersection of virtue ethics
and political philosophy, uh, something that's come to be
known as virtue politics. So my, my first book,
uh, titled The Authority of Virtue, Institutions and Character
in the Good Society, and the basic idea behind
that book was that, um, The purpose of politics,
the purpose of a political community, uh, going back
to Aristotle, as Aristotle argues, is to promote the
flourishing of the citizens, uh, is to promote the,
the happiness, let's say, of the citizens. And so
in that book, I argued that there's a, there's
a kind of reciprocal relationship between the citizens of
the state. Uh, THEY have to obey the laws
and they have to be, be good citizens, but
the state has to promote their, uh, their flourishing.
And, and not flourishing in a subjective way, but
flourishing in an, in an objective way, uh, connected
to, to the virtues of, of human flourishing and
so on. Um, SO in that book, uh, I
wasn't exactly arguing for a conservative point of view.
Um, IT wasn't really an ideological book. I was,
I was trying to say that both liberal and
conservative viewpoints can contribute to the enterprise of, of
human flourishing within a political community. Um, BUT as
I started to work more within the framework, uh,
the The idea is kind of tilted in a
conservative direction, um, based on this idea that the
state has a role in promoting the human good,
um, uh, in a, in a kind of substantive
sense, which is something that many forms of liberalism
will, will reject in favor of a kind of,
um, a kind of neutral state. Um, ALA John
Rawls' liberalism. Um, SO I started taking that seriously
and, and my own kind of political beliefs kind
of tended in that direction. Um, AND at this
time, I just finished my, my doctoral studies at
the University of Arizona in 2017. If you remember,
that was kind of a fraught time politically. We
just had the, the Trump election and everything was
kind of in chaos. There was a kind of
woke revolution going on. Um, AND I was trying
to get a job in philosophy, and I had
these kind of heterodox views that were, that were,
uh, let's say not working to my advantage. Um,
AND I published, uh, an essay in the online
magazine, uh, Quillette at that time called The Dearth
of, uh, Conservatives in Academic philosophy that was And
exploring the problem of why there are no conservatives
and why it would probably be a good thing
if there were conservatives. Um, AND so I, that
kind of, you know, planted my flag on the
map. Let's say I said, look, I'm a conservative,
these are my views. And so I started thinking
about these things more intellectually, uh, to develop, uh,
develop a kind of coherent, uh, conservative political philosophy,
which really, uh, doesn't really exist in the field
of academic philosophy, outside of a couple of people.
Um, THE late Roger Scruton, uh, John Keeks, a
few other people who are, who are not that
prominent, but, um, known among conservatives. And um, so
I thought, well, I'm gonna take my academic work
in this direction and kind of pursue this virtue
politics framework, uh, and, and see where it leads,
uh, in terms of uh conservative political philosophy. Um,
SO that was kind of the intellectual background, uh,
and kind of part of the personal, part of
my kind of personal journey, I guess you could
say. And, um, so then, of course, the pandemic
happened and everything kind of went, went out of
control. And my, my first book had come out,
um, as I say, the Authority of Virtue, which
was, which was based on my dissertation, virtue Politics.
And so I was looking for a new project
to start. I didn't really plan to write on
conservatism, but um there was this book series that
uh Rutledge publishes and um uh titled Why It's
OK. And the basic rationale for the book series
was to try to make a, uh, try to
make a philosophical case for the way that ordinary
people think and live. And so I looked at
that series, oh, OK, this is cool. I could
write a, I could write a book called Why
It's OK to be a Conservative, that would be
easy, you know, it was, it was supposed to
be kind of a short accessible series for a
for a general audience, you know, maybe I could.
Uh, MAYBE I could make a name for myself
in that way. So I put together this book
proposal, and, um, kind of, kind of quickly, actually,
just, just in like two months, basically, just at
the end of, uh, 2020, and, um, sent it
off to the editor, and, uh, the editor was,
was enthusiastic about the idea, but he didn't think
it was right for the series, but he encouraged
me to develop it into a more sort of
ambitious project, um, that included Not only uh a
history of conservatism, but a, a kind of a
theory of conservatism or a definition of conservatism, and,
uh, you know, it's relevance to the, the current
uh movements going on within conservatism, which are very
much in flux. Um, SO I left at that
opportunity. I thought, OK, great, and I, I put
together this very ambitious proposal that was, you know,
much longer than than the book ended up being.
I mean, so that's how, that's how conservatism, past
and present, uh, a philosophical introduction was, was born,
I guess.
So, but in the book you focus on philosophical
conservatism. What is it and how does it relate
or compare to other forms of conservatism?
Yeah, so one of the biggest problems of writing
about conservatism is to say exactly what it is.
Um, MANY people have tried to define conservatism. It
means many different things to many, uh, different people
and many different places and many different time periods.
Um, AND so the first, the first task I
had was to try to develop a, a, a,
a definition or an understanding of conservatism. Uh, AND
so I ended up with this, this idea that
I called philosophical conservatism, um, which takes a philosophical
approach to conservatism, and, uh, it consists of, of
kind of 33 different parts or 33 different moves.
And the first part or the first move is
to say that uh conservatism is really about the
search for wisdom, um, understood in the, the classic,
classical philosophy sense of, of the love of wisdom,
the search for wisdom, the search for the good
life, right? The pursuit of the good life, uh,
within a political community. Um, SO it's very much
taking Aristotle's, uh, Aristotle's ethics is conception of human
flourishing and thinking about, well, what would that, what
would that look like in a political context and
The conservative aspect of the search of wisdom for
me is that um the search for wisdom begins
where we are. And it begins from the society
that we live, that we live in, and it
begins from the good things that we already have,
uh, and, and it begins from this, this, um,
impetus or this disposition to want to conserve those
good things, and to build the good life out
of the good life that we already have, or
the good life, or the good things that we
already have. Um. And so that's the first, uh,
the first aspect of this, is this sense of
the search for wisdom, and this aspect that we
want to conserve what has value. Uh, WE wanna,
we wanna be attached to the things that we
love, uh, a phrase. Associated with Roger's scruton. Um,
SO then the question is, well, OK, we, we
want to conserve the things that we have, well,
how do we promote those things? How do we,
how do we grow in wisdom? How do we,
how do we, uh, uh, forge a conception of
happiness and the good life in a community with
other people? Um, WHAT does that look like and
how does that, how does that relate to, um,
Um, the political apparatus of society, um, can we,
can we really search for wisdom through the government?
That, that, that's, that's something that sets off alarm
alarm bells for certain people. Um, SO the the
second move is to say, well, OK, we're gonna
conserve the good, we're gonna promote the human good
in this kind of thick sense understood as a,
as a life of virtue in a community with
other people. Um, BUT that's not a license to
install the philosopher kings, um, and, you know, impose
a conception of the good life from the top
in a kind of authoritarian manner. And the reason
for that is that the second aspect of philosophical
conservatism, as I understand it, is that philosophical conservatism
is aware of the limits of human life and,
and the human being. So it's built out of
limits that are um epistemic limitations on what we
can know and what I call moral limitations, which
are limitations on our ability to um uh to
be moral, basically, right? We, we have weakness of
will, we're hypocrites, we're tempted, we're fallen creatures. Um,
AND so the, the search for wisdom has to
recognize our epistemic limits and our moral limits. Um,
AND so the epistemic limits, uh, kind of, uh,
lends weight to the idea of tradition that we
have these, uh, uh, systems and practices that have
been built up over time, and they have a
kind of, uh, uh, innate wisdom attached to them.
And, and that should be our kind of starting
point for thinking about, um, promoting the good. And
then the moral limits uh uh lean very heavily
on, on the idea of the rule of law,
and the idea that we have to, um, uh,
we have to follow the law, and we have
to, uh, uh, uh. Implement changes in society in
a way that is consistent with the rule of
law, and it's not radical, and is not revolutionary,
but works kind of from within um the political
community. And that leads to the last part of
the view, um, which is So you might think,
OK, we have these limits, and so there's no
way to promote the good, right? Because there's nothing
we can actually do. And so you might think
that leads to a kind of libertarian view where
the state just kind of, you know, uh takes
a kind of hands-off approach. Um, SO the last,
the last part is to say, well, well, we
need a standard of value. We have to know
when, when change is for the better. And in
my view, conservatism is not opposed to change, but
rather as, as Burke argues, uh, change is necessary
in order to conserve a society. A society has
to be open, open to change in order to
uh adapt to the circumstances and sustain itself throughout
time. Um, SO conservatism's standard of value, in my
view, is, is human happiness is the human good,
is a kind of uh uh conception of justice.
Um, BUT it's not a, uh, it's not an
ideological or an abstract sense of justice. It's not
a theory of justice, but the sense of justice
that works from within a community, that works from,
uh, within the existing traditions of a, of a
community of a political community, and it extracts its
moral ideas out of that tradition. Um, SO this
is a theme in the book that I call
change from within or finding justice within tradition. And
that's the way to uh uh uh identify and
legitimate change that, that genuinely, uh, uh, serves the
human good within a political community, um without overstepping
our limits and while, um, um keeping in mind
this idea that we're searching for wisdom together.
Mhm. Yeah, later in our conversation, we're also going
to get a little bit into more detail when
it comes to the tenets of conservatism, the values
and ideas associated with it, or at least with
certain authors that are or were conservatives themselves. But
uh now I would like to ask you, uh,
you mentioned justice there. And in the book, you
tie conservatism to the virtues of gratitude, humility and
justice. Could you explain that?
Yeah, so those three virtues um grow out of
the the three aspects of philosophical conservatism that I,
that I just outlined. So, um, the virtue of
gratitude is this idea that we have these good
things that have been, uh, uh, bequeathed to us,
that have been given to us from previous generations.
We're born into families, we're born into a system
of government, we're born into this, uh, you know,
tradition. Um, AND we should be grateful for those
things, and part of the conservative disposition is to
acknowledge, uh, the things that, that make the good
life possible. Um, SO I also talk about these
as duties of piety, uh, which traditionally are owed
toward your family, toward your, uh, your, your community
or your, or your, uh, political community, and also,
um, God. So three aspects of piety there that
that grow out of the sense of gratitude. Um,
SO that's the first virtue that I associate with
the search for wisdom. The search for wisdom begins
with an appreciation for the good things that you
already have. Um, AND the second one, humility, I
connect to this idea of limits. So we should
be grateful, um, and we should try to promote
the good, but we should not try to promote
the good in a way that exceeds our epistemic
and our moral limitations. And part of being aware
of those limitations, I think, is to, uh, is
to have the virtue of, of humility, right? We
should be intellectually humble, we should not overstate our
abilities, we should not think we can install philosopher
kings, anything like that. Um, AND we also should
not think that we're saints, and that every time
we try to promote the good that, uh, just
because we have good intentions that things are gonna
work out well, um, uh, we should have a
kind of tragic sense of the human being and,
and be aware of our limitations in that way.
Um, AND, um, Socrates is very much the, the
inspiration for the, for the virtue of humility here,
this idea that uh wisdom consists in knowledge of
your, of your own ignorance and I traced that
theme through some of the other uh conservative thinkers
in the history of philosophy. Um, SO those are
the first two virtues, um, gratitude, humility, and then
the third virtue is, is justice. Um, JUSTICE as
a, as a virtue of a person rather than
a virtue of a state. So justice understood as
somebody who abides by the laws, um, is interested
in promoting the common good. Um, BUT is only
willing to do so in ways that are consistent
with the political constitution, in ways that are consistent
with the rule of law, um, is not a
radical, is not trying to transform society into their
own vision of what justice should be, but rather,
uh, works for justice from within, from within an
existing tradition, and that, that corresponds to the, the
idea of change from within.
In the book, you also talk about and go
through the history of conservatism, particularly uh through the
history of conservative thinkers and authors and uh I
would like to ask you about that, but just
before we get specifically into that, how old is
conservatism?
Uh, YEAH, that, that's a great question. Um, SO
one of the, one of the things you have
to, uh, grapple with when you write about conservatism
is that, um, the history really matters, and, uh,
you have, you know, problems of anachronism. Uh, SO
I talk about the ancient philosophers and many people
will say, well, you know, Plato wasn't a conservative
because, you know, conservatism doesn't come along until much
later. Um, SO how old is conservatism? Well, the,
the modern ideology of conservatism is usually traced to
the 18th century and the response to the French
Revolution, of course, and Edmund Burke's, uh, reflections on
the revolution in France, um, which is not a
really, it's not really a political treatise, and, uh,
you know, it's, it's very particular to its time,
and you have to really extract a theory of
conservatism out of that book, um. But more generally,
I think the conservative disposition, I think, is as
old as as human nature. I think everybody has
a, has a, everybody has some aspect of the
conservative disposition, and some people are more prone to
it than others, let's say, psychologically speaking. Um, THERE'S
a kind of interesting discussion there about um um
the kind of personalities who tend toward. Conservatism. Um,
SO I would trace it to the, to the
18th century, but I think the 18th century, uh,
ideas of conservatism that are a response to the
French Revolution and, and really the rise of modernity
and liberalism more generally. Uh, WHEN society really starts
to change rapidly, you might think, like, before, before
that happens, there really isn't much of a need
for conservatism because things are not really changing, and
so there's no real need to defend the status
quo, to defend uh the things that we, that
we cherish. Um, BUT for me, what's distinctive about
my view, in some measures that um I don't
begin the story of conservatism in the 18th century,
because I think uh the so-called Enlightenment conservatism, of
course, it doesn't come out of nowhere. Um, FOR
me, it really grows out of these ideas that
are associated with the, with the ancient Greek and
Roman philosophers, um, as well as, um, Christian philosophy.
And so for me, it's, it's particular to Western
Europe at a particular time that's coming out of
these very Very strong, uh, intellectual strands. And so,
um, I like to think of conservatism has kind
of a prehistory and then the, the, you know,
the beginning of modern conservatism begins in the 18th
century.
So let me ask you a little bit about
some of the most ancient uh conservative thinkers that
you mentioned in the book, uh, including Plato and
Aristotle. I mean, which of their ideas would you
associate or label as conservative?
Yeah, so in the in the um chapter one
on ancient philosophy. Um, I traced the three themes
of philosophical conservatism, the, the search for wisdom, this
idea of limits, and the idea of change from
within, um, through three, ancient philosophers Plato, Aristotle, and,
and Cicero. He's kind of the, he's kind of
the odd one out, I guess. I don't know.
Not many people would, would say the name of
Cicero alongside the names of Plato and Aristotle, but
for me, Cicero is, is an important conservative political
philosopher. Um, SO all three of those thinkers, I
locate this theme of, uh, the purpose of politics
is the promotion of human flourishing, understood as a
life, uh, lived in accordance with the virtues, and
of course, that just is ancient political philosophy, and
I think uh that. IS a conservative way of
thinking about politics, um, that you find in the
ancient philosophers, and um I had a background in
ancient philosophy, it kind of got me into virtue
ethics, and eventually virtue ethics got me into thinking
about conservative political philosophy. Um, SO those are, that's,
that's a theme that all three have in common.
More specifically, this idea of limits, um, so Plato
is usually thought of as a kind of radical,
right? If you read the Republic, there are all
these wild ideas about how to reform society, we
should, you know, make property equal, we should, uh,
you know, have women participate in ruling, which was
totally radical at the time. Um, AND of course,
the idea of the philosopher kings. Um, I have
a different reading of Plato's Republic, which, uh, follows
some what you might call Straussian readings, which is
that when Plato develops the ideal city in the
republic, he's not putting it forward as a serious
political proposal. He doesn't think this is what the
just city should be, and this is how we
should implement the just city. He's putting it forward
as a kind of thought experiment. And the thought
experiment, the purpose of it, I think, is to
teach us that uh ideal justice is not possible
in this world, and that um Um, There's no
way, there's no way to achieve the just city,
and the reason why we can't achieve the just
city is that we're attached to these things, right?
We're attached to our families, we're attached to our
property. And it's foolish to try to implement these
things, um, politically speaking. Uh, AND if you read,
if you read the dialogue, you kind of, you
can kind of get hints that that's what he's
up to, because when, when Socrates introduces the idea
of the Philosopher kings, the philosopher kings are what
are supposed to get the Just City off the
ground, right? Well, you know, talk on that to
say, how are we gonna get this thing off
the ground? And Socrates says, well, we can get
it off the ground with one change, right? 11
little change. Philosophers have to be kings. You go,
oh wow. That's a big change. And so, what
I think Socrates is saying there is that, no,
we, we actually can't get this thing off the
ground, that utopian, the utopian just City is not
possible because of these uh limitations that we face.
Um, AND of course, you can't get the Philosopher
kings unless you have the Just City, right? But
you can only get the Just City if you
have the Philosopher king. So it's a kind of
a It's, it's a circle that I don't think
you can get into. Um, SO I see in,
in Plato there, uh, a strong sense that we
face these epistemic limits and these moral limits. Um,
SO even if we had the knowledge, even if
we get access Perfect justice in the way that
the philosopher kings are supposed to. You get the
sense from the republic that human beings would screw
it up, right? Even if we had the knowledge,
even if we had the technical ability, we wouldn't
be able to abide by, by it, right? We
wouldn't be able to live by it. Like, maybe
you could get the Just City off the ground,
but it would only last a day or a
week or something. Somebody would throw something in the
in the in the spokes and and mess it
up. Um, SO that's the contribution I see in
Plato. Uh, YOU also get very strong arguments in
Plato, uh, uh, in favor of the rule of
law. So Socrates' view in the, in the Creto
dialogue that he's going to abide by the order
of the court and face his death, even though
he thinks it's unjust. He thinks he should follow
the laws of the city. Um, YOU got a
strong argument for the rule of law there. Um,
ANOTHER dialogue, the statesman, I discussed, where a similar
argument is given that even, even if you have
a terrible state, it's better to obey the laws
of a terrible state than to uh disobey the
laws and try to change them because you'll end
up doing more harm than good. Um, SO that's
the view of Plato, Aristotle, um, I think is
more straightforwardly a conservative political philosopher, um, in the
sense that he, he has a conservative method, um,
Aristotle's method in in ethics and in politics is
to work from what he calls the NOA, which
are uh kind of opinions that have some, have
something to be said about them, things that are
that have some argument for them that people seem
to think that are ideas that are kind of
floating around, right? And Aristotle wants to, to look
at those and subject them to critical scrutiny and
to try to sort of seek the truth uh
uh out of those ideas. Um So Aristotle doesn't
come along and say everything we think about, uh,
you know, ethics and political philosophy is, is, is
nonsense, we should overturn it, and we should, you
know, build up our knowledge from scratch. He thinks,
no, we should work from kind of within the
societies that we're brought up in, and for that
reason, he thinks that um habits are very important,
uh, a student of ethics and politics has to
be brought up in what he calls fine habits.
Um, AND out of that, we'll, we'll develop a
sense of, of justice and the common good, and
it's gonna allow us to, uh, uh, improve society
from within, right? And it's gonna, we can study
political constitutions and understand what works and what doesn't
work, and, you know, sure, we can have this
idea of the best constitution and a, and a
kind of uh ultimate sense what he calls the,
the, the constitution that would be naturally just everywhere.
Um, BUT Aristotle, especially in his politics, he's more
focused on what works and what works given the
particular circumstances, uh, that you're dealing with. And, and
so for me, that's a, that's a conservative way
of thinking about politics that, uh, it doesn't have
to be what's best, all things considered, but it's
what's best for where we are and uh what
we're working from.
How does conservatism then relate to Christianism and uh
what kinds of conservative ideas can we find in
the philosophy of authors like Saint Augustine?
Yeah, so the, the Christian aspect is what I
call the other uh source of uh conservative political
philosophy. So there's the ancient source, and then there's
the Christian source. And of course, that that corresponds
to how many people think about the Western tradition.
There's this, you know, influence of Athens, and then
there's this influence of Jerusalem, right? And the, and
the marriage of those two things is really what
makes the the Western tradition. And I share that
view, and I think that's in fact what conservatives
are trying to. ARE trying to conserve. Um, SO
if the ancient aspect of that is the search
for wisdom, What's the Christian aspect. Um, SO the,
the subtitle of the, the chapter two on Christian
philosophy is, uh, the limits, the limits of philosophy.
And for me, the, the theme of Christianity is
to say that we're not going to do this
on our own. Um, THE human being cannot achieve
the good life by his own efforts, um, and
we cannot achieve good societies by our own effort,
uh. Takes our own effort, but it also takes
what you might call, uh, you know, the gift
of grace. It takes the grace of God to,
to be capable of happiness and to be lucky
enough to live in a, in a society that
is, that is a good society. Um, SO I
read Augustine and, and I see him. You know,
criticizing the stoics, for example, and, and saying these
guys were just arrogant, you know, they were, they
were so prideful that they thought they could win
happiness by their own efforts alone, that, that human
reason was capable of, you know, sort of winning,
winning virtue, and, and, and, and, uh, being triumphant
in that way. And, uh, and of course, Augustine
has this sort of, you know, darker sense of
human nature that grows out of his theology. Um,
THE idea of original sin, of course, is associated
with Augustine. Um, NOW, once you accept that, once
you accept that, OK, we're not gonna win this
thing on our own, we're not gonna, we're not
gonna save ourselves, uh, by our own efforts. That's
kind of liberating in some ways, because then you
can, you can focus your attention on other things.
Um, SO in Augustine, um, I traced 33 types
of limits. The first is the limits of human
nature. Right, we're fallen creatures, uh, right, marked by
sin, and there's, there's no way of overcoming that,
right? Um. And, and that aligns with the second
aspect of philosophical conservatism, this idea of um epistemic
and especially moral limits, right? The idea that even
if we could understand perfect justice, we wouldn't be
able to uh implement and abide by it, right?
Uh, SOMEBODY would, you know, eat the apple in
the garden, right? So something like that would happen
to screw things up. Um, SO that's the first
limit. The second limit has to do with politics,
um. You know, Augustine doesn't really have a political
theory, or he has a theology, uh, within which
you can kind of extract aspects of, of political
theory. Um, YOU know, Augustine thinks we need a
state because people aren't gonna be good on their
own, and we need coercion to keep people in
line, uh, and that authority is actually good because
it's been instituted by God, um, and we're not,
but we're not gonna find salvation within, within the,
the, the olus, right? The best we can do
is to keep peace. And to allow a kind
of earthly happiness, right? So this is the The
two cities idea, the earthly city, which is the
city that we find ourselves in the the actual
city, and then there's the, the city of God,
the heavenly city, and that's really where we should
be looking toward virtue and toward um um obedience
and love of God. Um, SO the second limit
is the limit of politics, right? We're not gonna
save ourselves in the palace, and then the third
limit is of philosophy itself, um. For Augustine, uh,
you can't live a good life without, uh, love
and worship of the highest good, right, which for
him, of course, is, is, is God, um, and
so that's Yeah, so if, if philosophy can't give
you a happy life, it's not gonna give you
a happy life within a within a political community.
Um, THE other half of the Christian chapter, uh,
is, is on Aquinas, and it's um. It's, I
think developing more kind of the positive side of
the Christian influence, so Augustine gives us the sense
of limits and the, you know, the, the dark
side of human nature. And this idea that we
can't save ourselves through philosophy, through reasoning, um, Aquinas,
I think, kind of, uh, he, he revitalizes the
Christian political, uh, theorizing, um, because he, he returns
to ideas associated with Aristotle that we can have
a kind of mixed constitution, uh, and we can
pursue the common good. And of course, he develops
the idea of natural law that can serve as
kind of a, a standard of value, right, a
sense of justice. Um, SO that's the second half
of the, of the Christian chapter, but for me,
Augustine is really the, the important figure.
Mhm. So, moving on now to focusing a little
bit more on modern conservatism and keeping, keeping in
mind the idea of change from within and that
means change from within the character of the existing
political order. Um, TELL us about the conservative attitudes
or the attitudes by conservative thinkers, uh, toward the
American Revolution and the French Revolution.
Yeah, so, chapter 3 is on um enlightenment conservatism.
Uh CONSERVATISM is sometimes thought of as a reaction
to the Enlightenment or rejection of the Enlightenment, but,
um, as Um, Jerry Muller, uh, someone who wrote
a very good anthology on conservatism, has said, um,
uh, conservatism is really a movement within the Enlightenment.
It's a way of looking at, um, uh, using,
using reason to promote human happiness in a certain
kind of way. And what the Enlightenment conservatives, uh,
provide is a kind of check against this idea
that Uh, you know, human reason is going to,
you know, lead to this kind of utopian society,
or we could establish, you know, a perfect society,
establish justice, um, in the way that the French
revolutionaries, uh, thought that they could. Um, SO the
Enlightenment thinkers I discussed are, uh, David Hume, uh,
Edmund Burke, and then there's a final section on,
uh, some of the thoughts of the American founders
from the, the Federalist Papers, and the contrast I
draw between the American and French Revolution is not
original to me, but you can find in most
conservatives who talk about these 22 great events, and
you can kind of see what the problem is.
So if conservatives are against Revolution, of course, conservatism
begins with Burke's um Critique of the French Revolution.
Well, how could conservatives support one revolution, the American
Revolution, but not support the French Revolution. And the
general idea is that the French Revolution was an
attempt to destroy, uh, it was, it was an
attempt to destroy an existing society and replace it
with something better. And, uh, the conservative critique of
that is that that was foolish and caused a
lot of misery and pain and destruction, and the
people who initiated the French Revolution, you know, were
actually were were actually just looking for destruction. They
weren't actually looking for anything that was, that was
good. Um, SO that's what you find in Burke.
With the, with a, with a critique that this
is really about overthrowing a society. Um, WHAT'S the
reason for thinking the American Revolution is any different?
So, as I understand it, the American Revolution was
an attempt at reform. It was an attempt to
take an existing society, roughly British society, which had,
you know, traveled across the Atlantic Ocean, and to
preserve it as it was, right, but to preserve
it in a new, uh, independent political condition. Um,
SO it wasn't really trying to destroy, it was
trying to separate and, uh, establish some form of,
of independence. Uh, AND if you read, if you
read Hume and Burke, uh, they, of course, Burke
wrote quite a bit on the American, uh, on
the American Revolution because he was a participant in
it cause he was a member of parliament. Um,
BUT Hume too has some writings where he discusses
the American cause, and Hume actually says that he's
American in his principles. Um, WHICH is very interesting,
um. And he thought that the attempt by the
British to, you know, manage, manage the Americans was
just foolish and it would be better just to
cut losses and and And uh and move on.
Um, SO you can see there that, OK, so
now does that mean, you know, there's a conservative
justification for something like the American Revolution anytime a
set of subjects feel like they're being persecuted on
any grounds, I, I don't think so. I think
the American Revolution was a kind of a a
rare moment in history where uh you have these
brilliant men come along and, you know, Try this
thing that could have gone spectacularly wrong, and it
didn't. So in hindsight, you can give a kind
of conservative philosophical defense of it, but unlike some
liberal views, I don't think that justifies a kind
of right to revolution in general. Um, AND conservatives
would be, I think, critical of the, the kind
of lay in reading of the American Revolution, wherein
you just have to show that a certain number
of grievances have been have been committed, and then
you can launch a revolution. The the conservatives are
gonna be very skeptical of that. They won't rule
out revolution, but it's always gonna be determinant on
the circumstances, and the judgment is not gonna rest
with any kind of philosophical principle, but it's gonna
rest with judgment and with, with prudence. And um
human himself is very strong on this. He says
that there's, there's nothing more foolish than to try
to develop a a philosophical theory of, of revolution,
uh. That almost always uh good sense and prudence
is on the side of, of um sticking with
what is already established.
So what kinds of ideas of conservative ideas can
we find among thinkers of the 19th century? And
uh could you tell us specifically also, I, I
mean, perhaps you can focus on the idea of
rhythm through authority. What does that mean? Yeah,
so, yeah, the subtitle of chapter 4 on 19th
century is uh freedom through through authority. Um, WHICH
is a view associated with, uh, with Hegel. Yeah,
so it's a kind of dialectic in in chapter
4 on 19th century philosophy, um, which is I
think uh it's an attempt to deal with the
Enlightenment, right? So in the 19th century, you have
kind of the rise of democracy and the rise
of what we now now would call liberalism, and
these things go in tandem. So you have this
kind of movement toward greater equality, both in the
social and in the political areas and culturally. Um,
AND then you have, um, uh, greater calls for
liberty, right, to be released from various kinds of
restraints, the, the restraints of tradition, uh, the restraints
of the church, and so on. And, and in
my reading this is a kind of reaction against
um what Burke had called the two great spirits
of uh European civilization, which he called the spirit
of the gentleman and the spirit of religion. And
those, I think, correspond to these calls for equality
and liberty. So the, the spirit of the gentleman
is this idea that uh we're not equal, that
we have these certain kinds of standards that are
encapsulated in this idea of the, of the European
gentlemen who, who, who upholds various virtues, right, which,
which really comes out of the kind of chivalric
tradition. Um, And, and that provides a kind of
check on self-interest and so on. Um, AND then
on the other hand, you have the spirit of
religion, um, which is a check on liberty, which
is to say, actually, you can't just live however
you want, even if you're not harming other people.
We have these duties and obligations, uh, that come
from God ultimately, and are, uh, you know, Encapsulated
in the church and the church has a certain
role in society to, you know, ensure that people
are, are, um, are being moral up to a
certain extent. And so by the 19th century, these
two things are really destroyed, um. Burke's idea of
the gentleman kind of, you know, falls by the
wayside, and of course the established churches are, are
literally destroyed in the case of the French. And
so you have this kind of void, um, void
of spirit, you might say, and um, yeah, for
me the 19th century is about this idea of
spirit, which is very difficult to describe, very difficult
to really understand what that is, um. Um, BUT,
but for, for me, it's this idea that a
society is not, it's not just a set of
principles, it's not just a set of abstract ideas,
but a society is a kind of a, it's
a kind of a living thing. It has a,
it has a soul, it has a spirit, and
it unfolds in a certain kind of way that
is not really up to the direction of any
individual person, much less any individual politician, um. And
so you have to work with that, right? It's
like if you're a, you know, if you're an
introvert, let's say, and you're gonna, you know, go
out and be a salesperson or go out and
do something that's very extroverted, you know, you can't
just do that. You have to, you have to
either train yourself or, you know, I don't know,
yeah, find some other line of work. There's certain
things that you, you just can't go in that
direction, right? So things have a kind of motion
of their own, I think. And so, in the
19th century, you have this kind of, uh, you
know, void of spirit, in some sense. And so
something has to come into the void and fill
it. And in the 19th century, what I see
are these very strong spirits of, of modernity, um,
one, a spirit of, uh, a spirit of democracy.
And I associate that with, uh, Alexei de Tocqueville's
work, uh, democracy in America, and he sees democracy
as this kind of inevitable force that's just, it's
coming, right? It's coming to Europe, it's coming to
the new world, and like, you can bury your
head in the sand, but, uh, it's coming. And
the thing that you have to do is to
try to deal with that and to try to
manage it. And to me, that's a real conservative
kind of disposition, like, OK, this is the way
the world is. Let's see if we can manage
it. Let's see if we can mitigate, you know,
some of its downsides and and take advantage of
its benefits. So it's the spirit of democracy, spirit
of equality, you might, you might call it. And
then there's also the spirit of freedom or the
spirit of liberty, and I associate that with John
Stuart Mill, who of course is no conservative, um,
is really in some sense he's the, he's the
most classic of the classical liberals. And Mil comes
along and says, look, we've got this conflict in
society between authority and the individual, and nobody's come
up with a good idea of how to combine
these two things, how to say, here's the, here's
the domain of society that's reserved to the individual,
and here's the domain that's left to society. And
Mil comes along and says, well, you know, we
have this principle that, you know, people should be
free to live how they want, provided they're not
harming others. And that's gonna tell us that, you
know, this is the domain of the individual and
the state should really, you know, butt out unless
it's preventing harm to other people. And that's the
spirit of liberty. So you take those two together,
you have this idea of equality, this idea of
liberty, and of course, modern liberalism is usually defined
in terms of those two values, um, the value
of liberty and the value of equality. The conservative
critique of that is is to say that a
society is much more than than um liberty and
equality. Um, SO, Uh, one of the thinkers, I
discussed is, uh, this guy James Fitz James Stephen,
who was a utilitarian, uh, critic of, of Mil,
and he was a kind of, he was a
kind of liberal, um, although he was much more
conservative than than Mil was. And um uh Stephen
writes this book called Liberty, uh, Equality Fraternity, which
of course is the Is the motto of the
French Revolution, and he says, look, all these things
are good, taken in isolation, but um they're not
ends in themselves. They're they're supposed to serve something
uh greater. They're supposed to serve something better, right?
Like the society, society is not about just releasing
all restraints, right? Because if you did that, you
wouldn't have any morality, cause morality is really about
restraints in one form or another. And, and same
with equality, and, um, and same with, same with
fraternity. Um, SO Stephen thought that we need, uh,
we need to think about institutions as restraints on,
on individual, on the individual will. And we have
to sort of think about institutions, ways to shape
them so that we, so that we can achieve
the common good, so that we can achieve the
overall good. And he thinks of institutions as like,
um, you know, reservoirs or things that direct water
in a certain way. So the, the water is
the is the liberty, right? It's the freedom to
do, I'm sorry. It's to do what you want
and, and institutions are the waterways that get the,
get the water going where it's supposed to go,
right? But liberty is not gonna tell you where
the water is supposed to go by itself. Liberty
is a kind of a, a kind of a
wild gas, as, as Burke calls it at one
point. So we need institutions to kind of direct
people in a certain way. And, and the way
to do that is not to just like give
up on this idea that the state should have
any role in morality, um, but to use the
state to shape people in a certain kind of
way. And um Steven is associated with a view
that later comes to be called uh legal moralism,
um, which is part of this debate in the
20th century between uh Lord Patrick Devlin and HLA
Hart, uh, which is a big debate within uh
a legal philosophy. And um, Patrick Devlin is great.
I, I talk about him in the book, uh,
a lot too. Uh I got a lot out
of reading his enforcement of morals. He's kind of
a, he's kind of a minor figure, but he's,
he's important in the book. Uh, THE last thinker
of the 19th century, so we have this problem,
right? So this, these spirits, the spirit of liberty,
the spirit of equality, OK? If you, if you
unleash those spirits, then it's gonna wreak havoc and
probably destroy your society. OK, so we need some
authority, we need to allow the spirit of authority
to check these, these two kind of volatile forces.
And so we're still left with this question. Well,
how do you reconcile these two things, right? How
do we reconcile freedom and authority? Um, AND for
me, Hegel is the way to reconcile these two
things, because, um, Hagel thinks that, uh, true freedom
is not you doing whatever you want. True freedom
is you uh living within the society that you
inhabit, and, uh, to, to seek freedom through participation
in the society. It's to seek freedom through, uh,
having a family, it's to seek participation and freedom
through, uh, you know, living in a society. And
so on. So he thinks that a true freedom
has to be one out of what he calls
the actual, and it's a very long and complicated
argument. I won't be able to do it justice
here, um, but yeah, Hegel's idea is that that
freedom exists in participation in some measure. We're not
made free by, by releasing the restraints. We're made
free by committing ourselves to, uh, genuine, genuinely worthwhile
pursuits. And, and in some ways, I think this
is a return to what's sometimes called the ancient
conception of liberty. Which is that uh a free
person is someone who has responsibilities and has a
certain role in the community. It's not someone who
just lives how they want, as long as they
don't harm others. Um, Stephen says at some point
about Mill's idea that, um, if Mill's idea was
correct, then In the day of judgment, it would
be a good plea to come to God and
to say, you know, I harmed nobody and I
pleased myself, and that would be like sufficient to
get you into heaven or something. And Steven just
thinks like, that's a crazy idea, you know, like,
a, a life is not about that, right? Life
is about, you know, doing things that are worthwhile,
and so on. Uh, SO to sum that up,
the, the 19th century. It's about freedom, but it's
about a specific kind of freedom, and it's about
a freedom that comes through authority, not in opposition
to authority. Um, AND so that, uh, cuts against
these two kind of dominant modern conceptions of liberty
as either this kind of negative aspect where I'm
just sort of left alone. And also this positive
aspect of liberty that the job of the state
is to, you know, make sure I have health
care and to make sure that I, you know,
have the things to make me free. It's like,
no, you have to win freedom for yourself through
participating in the in the community that you're born
into. Um, SO that's the way to reconcile, I
think, uh, freedom and authority. Mhm.
So, when it comes to the 20th century, could
you tell us about this very interesting split that
occurred between the conservatives who embraced economic and social
liberalism like uh in figures like Friedrich Hayek and
Robert. Nozic and I think we can also call
them libertarians, at least to some extent. And uh
those who remained faithful to the tenets of traditionalist
conservatism, such as Roger Scruton.
Yeah, so the last chapter in uh part one
conservatism passed is on conservative thinkers of the, of
the 20th century. Um, THE subtitle is a tradition
of liberty. Um, SO in the 20th, 20th century.
Um, CONSERVATIVES, it looks like they kind of become
liberals because they're trying to defend what are broadly
liberal societies and many of the liberal reforms that
were won by people like John Stuart Mill in
the 19th century, get kind of absorbed, I think,
into the conservative tradition. And then of course you
have the major uh political uh global conflicts of
the time, um, Soviet communism and uh Nazi totalitarianism.
So these, there are these genuine threats to liberty,
and conservatives come along and join with liberals in
defense of what I call our shared home. Um,
AND so it looks like conservatives were forced to
fight on the side of liberalism to to defend
what, of course, are genuinely uh good sources of
value. Um, BUT it looks like maybe conservatives maybe
became liberals in the 20th century, at least that's
been the read of, of. Of some people, and,
and I think it's, it's reasonable to say that
uh conservatives are committed to certain aspects of liberalism.
If you think that our societies are good and
worthy of con uh conserving, then you will think
that the, even the aspects that could be called
liberal will be worthy of, of conservation. Um, But
in my view, uh, the fact that there are
things about liberal society that are worth conserving does
not show that that we should be liberals necessarily.
Um, CERTAINLY not in any kind of philosophical sense,
um, but nevertheless, in the 20th century, that that's
kind of how things went. So we have the,
you have the rise of, um, What now we
call classical liberalism, which was an attempt to return
to the liberalism of the 19th century, and it's
very much a reaction against the, the, uh, sort
of more progressive form of liberalism that saw a
stronger view for the state in uh improving people's
economic conditions. Um, AND so classical liberal liberalism comes,
uh, comes against that, uh, but it's really united
on the, on the idea of social liberalism that
we should be free from various kinds of social
restraints, that people should be free to live how
they want, provided they're not harming others in Mill
sense. Um, SO in this chapter, I talk about,
uh, two of the most prominent libertarian or classical
liberals in, in philosophy anyway, and that's Hayek, uh,
and, and Robert Nozick, um, Nozick, who gave the
kind of libertarian critique of of John Rawls's famous
book, uh, A Theory of Justice, and then the,
the more traditional conservatives are, uh, Michael Oakeshott, um,
British political thinker, and Roger Scruton, also British. Uh,
SO the, the dynamic between these two views, uh,
I think the traditional conservatives, Oakshot and scrutin are
really at the heart of conservatism, and the classical
liberal is, is kind of, it's part of the
story in the 20th century, but I don't think
it's essential to what conservatism is. I think it
was a, a contingent reaction to the various threats
that that arose out of liberalism on the one
hand, and this, this more modern idea of liberalism
as being about economic equality, and also the, the
kind of foreign threats to the liberal order. Um,
SCRUTINY in particular, um, his first book on conservatism,
uh, titled The Meaning of Conservatism, which was published
in 1980. Um, IF you read the, the preface
or the introduction to that book, he says that
he wrote that book in order to combat the
rise of what he called Thatcherism at the time,
which was uh a a movement within the Conservative
Party in the United Kingdom to kind of attach
the The Hayekian or the classical liberal philosophy to
the Conservative Party, and indeed Thatcher is said to
have held up, I think. I think Hayek's, the
Constitution of liberty, she like held it up at
some party meeting and said like, this is what
we believed and banged it on the table and
and and scrutin, you know, being a traditional conservative
who who Who traces the movement back to Burke,
uh, could see that that was not what conservatism
was really about. And, and his critique of that
uh aspect of, of conservatism in the 20th century
is that uh it really elevated the market above
all else, and it elevated economic liberty above all
else. And conservatives are in favor of the market,
um. ARE in favor of capitalism, broadly speaking, um,
but, but not in any kind of ultimate sense.
So conservatives will recognize, uh, kind of in line
with Marxists actually, that there are some real downsides
to markets and markets really disrupt things and cause
all kinds of chaos and change. And so, uh,
we want to be kind of skeptical of the
market and, and use it, uh, in order to,
uh, you know, improve economic growth and to make
better lives for people, but we don't want to,
we don't want to worship it as some kind
of idle. Um, SO I see, I see Oakeshott
in scrutiny as, as reacting both toward the, the
modern liberals, uh, but also toward the classical liberals
who, who, um, uh, are conservative in one sense,
they're conservative in an economic sense, but not really
in a, in a social sense, um. And these,
these divisions, I think, are still with us in
some measure. So one thing that comes out of
the libertarian movement in the 20th century is the
so-called fusionist conservatism, which was a marriage in America
between, um, kind of traditional social conservatives, uh, religious
conservatives, you might say, um, That, uh, who were
opposed to communism in the in the 1950s and
1960s, and the uh libertarians or or free market
types, and fusionist conservatism was supposed to kind of
blend those two things, so the The social conservatives
could support the free markets, uh, but not the
kind of, you know, libertine lifestyle of the libertarians
or the classical liberals, and the classical liberals could
say, well, you guys are social conservatives, but at
least you support free markets. And of course, both
groups were very opposed to communism, uh, and the
Soviet Empire, and both, both views were opposed to
modern liberalism. Uh, SO it was a kind of
a, it was a kind of a convenient alliance,
and it, and it was very successful, characterizes the
Reagan era in America and and Thatcher, of course,
and uh uh it kind of culminate, it sort
of peaks in the 90s, I would say, and
then you get a kind of You got a
kind of status quo conservative politics, uh, you know,
for, for the 2000s and 2010s, and then of
course, everything was blown up in, in 2016 with
with Trump.
Uh YES, uh, let's talk then about Trump, uh,
about the present of conservatism. That fusionism that you
mentioned there that occurred in the 20th century between
conservatism, or traditional conservatism and libertarianism. How did it
eventually transform into the sort of populist nationalist conservatism
associated with Donald Trump and his supporters?
Yeah, that's a great, great question. So that's really
the, the focus of part two is to try
to connect the ideas of conservatism that are explored
in part one, these philosophical ideas and say, well,
of what relevance to these ideas have uh in
the current moment. What relevance, to what extent is
conservatism present connected to conservatism past? And there's good
reason to think that they have nothing to do
with each other. Um, AND the task of the
book was to try to say, oh, no, actually,
there's, there's more to it than you think, like,
you know, Donald Trump is no conservative political philosopher,
but, you know, if you take some of these
ideas that are associated with the conservative movement that's
going on now, seriously, you can trace them in
in various ways. Um, SO how did that story
happen? Um, So the story I want to tell
and and Um, I don't know how convincing it
is, but people more interested in the, in the
history of American conservatism than I than I am,
will have a more thorough story to tell. I'm
really interested in the ideas, but as far as
the, the, the politics go, I, I think the
simplest story is just that the fusionist, uh, consensus
just failed to conserve anything, um. This is a
view that I think Patrick Denin has talked about
this and why liberalism fails, and in his, his
latest book, a regime change, uh, fusionism, it was
supposed to be conservative, but it ended up just,
uh, kind of promoting free markets, which, yeah, that's
a good thing. But it didn't really do anything
for social conservatives, right? Society got way, way, way
more liberal, um. And, uh, didn't shrink government or
do any of those things that were promised, right?
Oh, we're gonna get a smaller government. Well, no,
that didn't really happen. Um, AND so it just
really, it really just failed to conserve anything that
conservatives care about. And so, the populist movement, I
think, is a reaction to that, to say, look,
we voted for you guys, you know, on these
platforms. You said you were going to do this,
you said you were going to do that, and
it hasn't happened, right? Uh, YOU haven't been listening
to us and, you know, we tried to You
know, vote, vote, vote for these kind of respectable
people like, you know, Mitt Romney's and the George
W. Bush's and and the John McCains and these
kind of figures, and they were all useless, and
they didn't get the job done. Uh, SO, OK,
this big loud guy is gonna come along who,
yeah, OK, he's, he's he's not a very nice
guy. He doesn't really have conservative principles, but he's,
you know, gonna advocate for us and he's gonna
He's going to, uh, you know, actually do the
things that he says he's that you guys said
you were gonna do, uh, and so we'll just,
we'll just go with him, um. And that has
been successful, it seems, uh, and so there's a
kind of, there's a kind of backlash against the
kind of respectable form of politics that was, you
know, kind of conservative in, in, in manner and
conservative in in temperament and and affect, but not
conservative in results. Um, AND then the, the nationalist
side, I think, is to say, well, you know,
we want to like refocus on what we're doing,
and we don't want to be involved in all
these global conflicts and, and we're, we're gonna focus
on the health of our own of our own
societies before we look at the before we look
at other societies. Um, SO that's, that's, I think
the story it was just You know, conservatives did
a bad job. They didn't do anything they said
they were gonna do. The conservative electorate really remained,
and they saw an opportunity to, you know, hire
somebody for the job that was willing to do
it and didn't really care what anybody thought, uh,
especially didn't care what the media thought, or the,
the so-called liberal establishment, and so on. And uh
Yeah, kind of obvious in hindsight, I think, uh,
but we're still grappling with this, right? So, you
know, every day there's some new thing, the tariffs
and the foreign policy and this and that, and,
uh, I don't know, for conser conservative is supposed
to be kind of flexible, right? So it's it's
not supposed to be ideological, it's not supposed to
be doctrinaire, it's supposed to be kind of flexible
and move at the time. So I'm many conservatives
are kind of unsettled by. Everything that's happened in
the last decade or so, but I think, no,
it's, it's necessary in some measure, and you have
to be very careful. Uh, THERE'S reasons to be
afraid of populism, uh, but I think ignoring it
is worse. So I think populism, it's more of
a, it's more of a symptom than a cause
of, of the discontent that that we're experiencing in,
in the, in the west.
So in the latter part of your book, you
go through several different topics and modern aspect, aspects
of modern modern society that conservatives have a say
in or they hold certain attitudes toward them. So
let me ask you, I, I'm not sure if
we will have time to go through all of
them, but at least let's go through some illustrative
examples here. What kinds of attitudes do conservatives hold
toward immigration?
Yeah, so in the nationalist chapter, um, chapter 6.
Um, I put forward a kind of conservative view
of nationalism that's not ideological. It's really about um
thinking about uh the domestic political community, prioritizing the
interests of citizens over the interests of foreigners, and
it's viewing the nation in terms of uh territory
and law rather than ethnicity or religion or or
anything like that. Um, SO it's supposed to be
a kind of minimal view of nationalism that's not
subject to the kind of objections that people put
forward that, oh, this is just, you know, white
nationalism or Christian nationalism or whatever kinds of things
that people say. Um, AND then the big issue
that's raised by, um, Uh, by, by the nationalist
idea, especially in the current moment, and it's an
issue that drives a lot of populism is the
issue of immigration. So there's a fairly long discussion
of immigration in, in Chapter 6. And, uh, the
view I put forward is that uh conservatives are
not opposed to immigration in principle. Um, Although I
do think that they are opposed to illegal immigration
in principle, because illegal immigration is a violation of
the rule of law, um, by definition. And so
there's a kind of open and shut case against
illegal immigration on conservative grounds, uh, if you believe
in the rule of law, uh, so I explain
that argument in chapter 6. ON the other side,
there's legal immigration, and there you might take different
views. I, I don't think conservatives have to be
opposed to legal immigration in principle. Um, IN a
democratic society. You might think that legal immigration should
be determined by what the people want, and it
should be uh decided legislatively, and of course, the
problem in America is that the legislature hasn't been
able to pass any kind of immigration reform, and
so it's been subject to the whims of whatever
administration is in charge, so the Biden administration just
kind of, you know, Didn't bother to enforce the
laws and so we had record numbers of, of
illegal immigration and now Trump is shutting things down
and so, you know, it just depends on who's
in office. Um, Now, uh, even if, so yeah,
even if you have legal immigration, uh, it should
still follow the will of the electorate, and, um,
if you look at opinion polling, uh, in America,
and, and I think this is true in Europe
as well, most people want less immigration, even, even
legal immigration, even if the law is not being
broken, people think, ah, you know, the societies are,
it's changing a little too fast, right? It was,
there's too many people coming in, it's a strain
on social services. Uh, YOU know, this is not
the country that I grew up in. Things have
changed too quickly. And for years, politicians have just
ignored those desires. Um, YOU know, for one reason
or another, whether they like the idea of having
more labor come in or, you know, they're serving
all these different interests. And it also just looks,
it looks like being open to immigration is a
good thing, right? We should welcome people, we should
be generous, we should, you know, want to help
people who are, who are fleeing. You know, catastrophic
situations and so on. Um, SO the pro, uh,
the pro-immigration side really has their heart is in
the right place and, and And there's reason to
support it. Um, BUT we have to be prudent
about these things, and, you know, you just open
up the doors and let people come in, or
maybe even abolish borders, which some libertarians want to
do, um, you're not gonna have a country as,
as President Trump is fond of saying, right? A
nation without borders is not a, is not a
country. Um, SO even for the legal side, I
think there are reasons that a democratic elect electorate
might want to Might want to slow immigration or
to impose certain kinds of restrictions to, you know,
up the requirements for, uh, you know, the citizenship
exam and so on. And I actually became an
American citizen in the course of writing this book,
so I have some I have some knowledge of
the immigration system and the, the civics exam that
they make you take is, is embarrassingly easy and
and pitiful and just, you know, it should be
a lot more difficult um than it than it
actually is. And then the last, the last reason
which is connected, you might think, well, why would
democratic electorates have these desires? Uh, THERE'S economic and
cultural reasons why you might oppose, uh, even, even
legal immigration. So it might come at a cost
to the domestic labor force. So even if immigration
is good in the aggregate, it doesn't follow that
just because immigration is good for GDP that, uh,
you know, me working some, I don't know, manufacturing
job in the middle of the country. Might not
be good for me. It might cost me a
job even if it's good for the country as
a whole. So I think it's, it's not a
good idea to ignore those people and the fact
that those people have been ignored is what's driven
the populist movement, I think. Um, AND then the
cultural reasons have to do with just, OK, we're
gonna let people in legally, OK, well, who should
we let in? I mean, Should we let people
in who are kind of more like us, who
have beliefs that we have? Should we let people
in who are, you know, Uh, coming from war-torn
countries, um, these things make a difference because a
country is, is not just an idea, and it's
not just a, a set of laws. The country
is made up of the people. And so, if
you import a bunch of new people into your
society and they're different, uh, now your society is
different and it's gonna change. Uh, SO I think
it's, it's reasonable to care the kinds of people
that you let into the country.
What ideas do conservatives have about the family and
how important is the family as a kind of
social unit and institution?
Yeah, so conservatives, and this is in chapter 7
on the family, um, for, for conservatives, the family
is the most important social institution, and the government
exists to uh serve the family, to protect and
and serve the family, not, not the other way
around, um. Um And now, why is, why is
the family the most important social institution? So it's
the It's where we're formed morally, right? It's where
we develop our ideas, it's it's how society is
is passed on from one generation to the next.
Uh, PROVIDES a secure environment for children, um, and
it exists as its own kind of autonomous society
and as a, as a potential, uh, check, let's
say to government, government power. Um, THE conservative view
is that all these all the institutions smaller than
the government exists as a kind of counterweight or
a kind of uh uh equilibrium, equilibrium of of
authorities. And the family is, is the most important
one because it's what we're born into, it's what
forms us. Um, AS I say in the chapter,
the, the family is a, is a place for
formation, not a place for freedom. And there's this
idea that, uh, you know, the family is a
kind of restriction on our desires, and the family
should really just exist to serve the children, to
make them into who they're supposed to be or
whatever, uh, whatever the idea is, and the conservative
view is, no, the family is, is, is there
to form you to be fit for the kind
of society that you live in. Uh, SO there
has to be a kind of, a kind of
cooperation, uh, between the state and the family. And
you can see this in education, right? Are the
public schools there to, you know, form your kids
into the kind of citizen that the government wants,
or are they there to, you know, partner with
the families in order to Uh, form, form children
in ways that, that, uh, That that are that
are not antagonistic, right? And, and you see this
conflict all over the place now with the kinds
of stuff that's getting taught in the public schools
and conservatives are, are sounding the alarm about all
of that and, and rightly so, I think because
uh Uh, in many aspects, the, the purpose of
the public schools seems to be to separate the
children from the families in a certain kind of
way, and to turn the, turn the children against
the families in a way that, uh, conservatives would
say is a kind of active and piety, um.
So that's the, the idea of the family. I
talked about some other issues in that chapter. Um,
SO the family is usually associated with social conservatism,
which has to do with, with views about sex
and marriage, and, and abortion and so on, so-called
family values. Um, SO I give, I give, uh,
I give some arguments against abortion in that chapter.
Uh, BASED on the value of life, right? If
we're gonna be conservative, if we're gonna seek to
conserve the good, well, life is among the most
important goods, right? It's the source of all goods
in some measure. And so the conservative case for
abortion is that we should preserve life, we should
be Uh, we should be grateful for life, we
should be open to life in a certain kind
of way, um. We should be opposed to the
destruction of life. Um, AND of course, abortion is
something that gets in the way of the reproduction
of society over time because it interferes with the
reproduction of children. Uh, OF course, birth rates are
at record lows, so conservatives have an interest, the
state has an interest in people having families and
having children, um, if only to, you know, uh,
fund the social welfare programs and that that need
uh taxpayers and so on. Um, SO that's, that's
kind of the abortion, uh, angle of the chapter,
and then, uh, I give some arguments for traditional
marriage as well. And also uh conservative attitudes about
about sexual ethics, which I don't know, probably. Even
among conservatives, not everybody is a social conservative in
this way, and, you know, even if you look
at the Trump movement and the populist movement, you
know, how much of that movement is really in
favor of traditional sexual morality. I mean, I don't
know, it's hard to say, but I do think
it's core, I do think it's core to the
view and and really lies at the center and
uh. You know, even if conservatives win elections, if
the family is destroyed, there's not gonna be anything
left for the politicians to conserve, I think. Um,
SO I'll just give you a little taste of
some of these arguments, um, uh, you know, the
argument for traditional marriage is that, you know, marriage
is a tradition, it's a custom that's, you know,
been the same for centuries, and it's Foolish to
think we could reform it. It serves a certain
kind of purpose. Um, MARRIAGE is not just a
kind of voluntary arrangement that you might or might
not enter into. It's central to human life. It
has a certain kind of function, uh, to, to
raise children and to provide companionship for the adults.
Um, SO I give kind of a, I don't
know, an ethical, an ethical argument for traditional marriage
that uh grows out of some of the conservative
thinkers. Um, Hagel has a very good view of,
of the ethical aspect of marriage. Um, AND then
the traditional conservative sexual ethic, of course, grows out
of the, the view of marriage. Um, WHAT is
sex for? What's the purpose of sex? Is it
just pleasure, is it just fun? Uh, NO, sex
is for, right, to make a marital union stronger,
and it's also for the, for the production of
children. And if that's true, then the moral norms
that govern sex are gonna be a lot more
than just consent, uh, and The reason for that
is that uh sex can't serve its purpose if
it's not governed by norms, and the norms have
to kind of serve the purpose, uh, not just
serve the individuals. Um, And, you know, there's more
of a case to be made that the the
conservative sexual ethic is actually better for the individuals
as well, that it actually leads to more long
term happiness, um, and some of this is starting
to kind of break through, um. I'm trying to
recall her name. I think it's Louise Perry. Louise
Perry wrote a book recently against the, against the
sexual revolution, uh, uh, kind of on feminist grounds
as I recall, I cite that book in the
chapter. Uh, AND the basic idea is just, look,
if you, if we're gonna be conservatives and we
want to promote happy lives, we want to promote
lives of virtue, well, uh, a life of virtue
that Leaves sexual ethics out of it and thinks
that consent is the only thing that matters for
sex, it's not gonna be a happy life. Uh
MIGHT be happy in the short term, but it's
not gonna be happy in the long term. Um,
SO that's kind of, kind of the case I
give there.
And how do conservatives deal with issues surrounding responsibilities
and rights?
Yeah, so this is the last, uh, the last
chapter, chapter 10, um, kind of falls out of
the theme a little bit. So 6 is on
nationalism, which looks at kind of the global, not
the global, but the domestic political community. Populism kind
of looks at more kind of local issues, economic
issues, um, things like that. Uh, THE family is
focused on the smallest unit, right, uh, of, of
society. Um, THERE'S a chapter on education, which I
guess we're gonna skip over that, uh, which is
on the, the role of schools in the community,
so again, at the local level. Um, AND the
last chapter is on responsibility. And so there I'm
looking at, uh, I'm really trying to answer what's
the role of government. And so you might have
thought, maybe you should have started with that. And
but for me, those other, those other ways of
looking at society from the different levels, from the
family, the local community, the national community, that's the
right way of thinking about it, I think, from
a conservative point of view. Um, SO in, in
chapter 10, I talk about the purpose of government,
and I want to emphasize the purpose of responsibilities
over the purpose of rights. Uh, SO usually in
a lot of liberal political theory, what's the purpose
of the government? Well, it's to establish justice. It's
to protect people's rights, right? It serves this kind
of procedural role. And then within that framework, the
debate between the libertarians, let's say, and the liberals
is really, well, how big should the government be
and how many things should it do? Should it
just protect people's property rights like the libertarians think,
or should it also ensure that people have some
kind of minimal level of well-being? And so that's
the debate that you saw really in the 20th
century uh between so-called big versus small government, surely
the debate between Rawls and Nozick, as I see
it, um. And I want to just kind of
sidestep that debate and say that the purpose of
the government is not really how big or small
it should be. It should be as big as
it needs to be or as small as it
needs to be, and that really depends on the
circumstances. So in the American context, you know, we
have this massive country and the government's big because
it's a big country and it's grown to be
big, and it's, it's grown in ways that are
not good, let's say, but, OK, it has to
be sort of proportionate to the size of the
country. Um, BUT the thing that matters is what's
the government doing? What's the purpose of the government?
Is the, is the government genuinely serving the common
good of the people? Um, It's conceivable that a
government could protect everybody's rights, but everybody was miserable
and vicious, um. Um, THERE'S a line, uh, I'm,
I'm taking a line out of uh Rosalind Hirsthouse,
who's a very good virtue ethicist, and she says,
uh, can you imagine a liberal society in which
everybody's rights are respected, but everybody is wicked and
vicious? Seems like that's perfectly possible. Uh, WELL, if
that's possible, that's a society that respects people's rights,
and it's, it's just in a certain sense, but
it, it's certainly not good. And so on my
view, the conservative view of the government is a
kind of reciprocal relationship which exists between the government
and the citizens, and the government is looking out
for the well-being of the citizens, and the citizens
are performing their obligations that they have to the
government, they're following the law. Um, AND so, the,
the citizens receive rights, but they also have responsibilities
in order to sustain the government, and, and not
just the government, but also, um, what I call
following uh Robert Nisbet, the, the intermediate institutions, the
institutions that lie between the individual and the government,
so the, the church and the school and the,
the family, uh, what sometimes called civil society. And
The conservative view is that the health of the
intermediate institutions is what prevents the government from becoming
too big or from uh becoming tyrannical over the
individual. Um, AND that really grows out of uh
a critique of liberalism that you find in uh
Toville. Uh, THAT Robert Nisbet, who wrote, um, this
great book, The Quest for Community in 1953, um,
uh, drew on Tocqueville to show that Uh, actually,
liberal liberalism, when it, when it releases you from
the government, it actually makes the government stronger because
it actually weakens your ties to all of the
intermediate institutions and actually kind of destroys civil society.
And so you're freer, but you become, you become
perversely more dependent on the state. And so, uh,
Nisbet says, you know, what the state gives to
the individual, it just sort of takes to grow,
to grow itself. And that's the way in which
the, the, the social liberalism and economic liberalism, uh,
uh, sort of work together in order to grow
the state, and both come at the cost of
the individual. Um, ON the conservative point of view.
And so the way to avoid that from a
conservative point of view is to emphasize responsibilities, to
not just focus on the state versus the individual,
but to look at the intermediate institutions and to
see the, the purpose of the citizen, in conjunction
to the purpose of government as performing various roles
that you have, uh, in virtue of being a
member of, of, of these various institutions.
So I want to ask you just about one
more social institution, and then I have one final
question before we wrap up our conversation. Uh, WHAT
about religion? How does conservatism relate to religion and
the society need religion?
Yeah, um, So there are different views you could
take on this, um. Some conservatives like Michael Oakeshott,
for example, uh, seem to not think religion is
central to conservatism. Um, That it's valuable, let's say,
but, but not necessary. Um, I think it's necessary
in a certain kind of way, and there's kind
of two arguments you can give that look like
maybe their intention, but I think kind of come
together. Um, SO there's what you, what you might
call the, the skeptical or the empirical argument for
religion on conservative grounds, which you see in David
Hume, I think, even though he was kind of
irreligious himself, um, you definitely see it in Burke.
And this is the idea that uh society needs
religion to serve as a kind of school for
uh forming people, for giving them a sense of
responsibility, of a sense that they're accountable, or they're
subject to some form of judgment, that is not
just the judgment of their peers, and it is
not just the judgment of the government, but it's
some kind of higher judgment. Um, SO it's a
kind of consequentialist or utilitarian justification for religion. Of
course, it doesn't say it has to be this
religion or that religion. Although maybe there has to
be a majority religion. So it sees religion as
as serving a very important social function in coordinating
people and um allowing them to be united in
the same society, even if they have all these
other, other differences and so on. And it sees
uh religious pluralism as, you know, potentially a problem
for the unity of the country. Um, SO that's
the skeptical side. Um, I say skeptical because, um,
it's not skeptical of religion, but it's skeptical of
this idea that human beings can govern themselves without
any kind of metaphysical or or uh spiritual dimension,
right? If people can't govern themselves by the material
world alone, right? We need some kind of, we
need some sense of the spiritual. Um, THE other
argument is what you might call the metaphysical argument
for religion. Which says, no, society needs religion because
we have to be oriented toward the highest good
and the highest things, and we have to be
oriented toward the truth, right? And what conservatives are
trying to conserve is, is the, the three transcendentals,
the, the true, the good, and the beautiful. And
if you exclude religion, you're gonna miss at least
one of those, and probably all of them. In
a certain kind of way. Um, AND so you
see this in, uh, Joseph De Maestra, who I
discussed in, uh, in chapter 4, who was a
very strong Catholic and a critic of the French
Revolution, and he thought that in order to, he
says, um, I'll paraphrase, but he says, in order
to conserve all, you must consecrate all. That in
order to conserve things, they have to be sacred,
right? Uh, LIKE, even if you don't think they're
sacred, just make them sacred, right? And if you
make them sacred, they'll be secure, they'll be less,
they'll be less liable to vandalism, uh, of one
kind or another. Uh, SO the metaphysical conservatives says,
no, we should, we should protect these things because
they're good, because they're sacred, because they're valuable and
they're important. Um. Now, OK, can we predict those
things if we don't actually believe in them? Well,
probably not. Probably you actually have to believe in
order to protect them, right? You can't just say,
well, yeah, people should be religious and we should
have religions and we should have churches, but, well,
I don't have to participate in it, right? I
think a lot of conservatives are I think tempted
to that view, but I think, no, if you
think religion is important, you actually have to do
it yourself. You can't just be a spokesperson for
it. And I think you see that now in
some of the some of the intellectual movements toward
Christianity, for example, some intellectuals are starting to kind
of come around, you have people like um Hersey
Ali and and and Niall Ferguson, her husband. And
of course, the Jordan Peterson phenomenon, all these people
who are kind of making, making moves toward religion
at first from a kind of, you know, civilizational
point of view, but I think at some point
you have to say, well, is this true or
is this not true? And if it's not true,
then probably it's bad for society, right? But if
it is true, then it's good for society. So.
Uh, SO, finally, how do you look at the
future of conservatism?
Yeah, so the last chapter is is titled The
Future of Conservatism. And um This is not really
original to me, I guess, but I like to
see conservatism as a kind of a journey, um,
a journey through time, and, and so that's why
the, the book is organized as it is past,
present, and then a final comment at the end
on the future of conservatism. Um, SO there's this
kind of critique that you see, um, that conservatism
is really about a kind of quaint nostalgia or
something, right? It's about, you know, reminiscing about the
good old days and You know, you can watch
videos of look how people dressed in the 1950s.
Look how beautiful they looked, you know, it's like,
why can't we just go back to that, to
this kind of quaint nostalgic idea, um. There's a
great interview that uh Roger Scruton did with Peter
Robinson of the, of the Hoover Institution. And at
the end of the interview, Robinson gives him this
objection. He says, this all sounds great, Roger, Sir
Roger, but, you know, this just sounds like Tolkien.
This is just like, you know, longing for the
Shire, and, you know, what's what of what relevance
is that now, and how we, how can we
conserve when everything's been destroyed and, and what is,
what does the future look like given that and
and scruton gives this very moving answer where he
says, look, you know, We're always on guard against
destruction. Things are always falling apart, but there's this
kind of call to build, and there's this call
to conserve, and there's this call to, you know,
even if everything is gonna fall apart, like it
doesn't have to fall apart today, right? It doesn't
have to fall about, it doesn't have to fall
about fall apart tomorrow. And the purpose of conservatism
in the future is just to say, well, this
is how we're living. This is like, this is
how we'd like to continue living. And in order
to continue living like this, we have to build.
We can't just sort of wish that things were
like they were in the past, and we can't
just assume that things are gonna follow along. So,
part of the, part of conservatism is conserving, part
of it is promoting the good. But then there's
also this aspect of building that in order to
promote, you can't just, you can't just talk, right?
You can't just write books on You know, conservative
political philosophy and think, OK, I'm gonna write this
book and everyone's gonna see the light and everything's
gonna come forward. It's like, no, you gotta get
involved in your community, you gotta have a family,
you know, you should probably join a church, you
should probably get involved in politics at the local
level, um. And that's gonna give you a life.
It's gonna give you a life that's worth living.
It's gonna be something to do, um, it's gonna
develop your virtue and, and so on, and you're
gonna be a better citizen and so on, um,
and it's gonna be a journey and it's gonna
actually lead somewhere. Uh, IT'S gonna cause you to
build things. And the idea of the journey, and
this is kind of the conservative aspect, right? You're
not You're not journeying into some promised land, right?
You're not journeying to utopia. That would be one
kind of more liberal way of looking at it.
We're gonna, you know, we're gonna be the change
we see in the world, and we're gonna change
the world for the better, right? And this is
what every university website says, we're gonna build students
who make a difference in the world. And the
conservative attitudes and no, the journey is really about,
it's about building a home. It's about journeying back,
right? It's about journeying home to where you should
be, right? To where you're meant to be. And
it's, it's only in the journey in that you
are able to find the home, right? So, you
journey into the past, right? You understand your tradition,
you understand the society that you live in, and
then what first seemed alien now seems like it's
yours, right? So you make the thing yours, and
then you live it in the world, and I,
uh, I wanted to finish the book with, uh,
the, uh, This uh This, uh, TS Eliot poem
from the 44 quartets, where he makes this, he
makes this point in this kind of poetic sense.
My publisher said, oh, you can't use that because
we have to pay the copyright, but, uh, but
he has this idea of the journey home, uh,
and the journey home, the journey leads back to
home, and in, in undertaking the journey, he says,
you come to know the, you come to know
the place as if for the very first time.
Uh, AND so that's what I see the, the
role of conservatism is to make us feel at
home in the world to. You know, protect against
the alienation, to, to build a good life for
ourselves, and to, to hopefully to conserve the good
that we have left, and maybe to build it
and promote it into the future.
Great. So, the book is again conservatism, past and
present, uh Philosophical introduction. Of course, I'm leaving a
link to it in the description of the interview.
And Doctor Rogers, just before we go apart from
the book, where can people find you and your
work on the internet?
Um, YEAH, you can find me on X.com, formerly
known as Twitter.com. Uh, Tristan J Rogers 11. You
can just search for, you know, I'll pop up
there. I'm not spending a lot of time there
right now cause it's uh Lent, but, uh, trying
to limit my social media use. Uh, I have
a website, TristanJ Rogers.com, uh, where I have some
of my other writings. And uh you could buy
the book on Amazon.com or Rutledge.com, and I have
an academia.edu page as well. You can look that
up. There's a link. There's a link on my
website. And of course, you want to send me
an email, I always love to get emails. Tristan
J. Rogers1@gmail.com.
So thank you so much for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a real
pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much, Mr. Lopez. Pleasure is all
mine.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labrant Ju Jasent and the Samuel
Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran
David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono
Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb
medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zallidrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti
Gabrielon Scorteus Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams,
the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior,
Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Gray,
Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander
Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John
Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson,
Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik,
Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew
Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.